A RTICLE
The Importance of Cognitive Errors in Diagnosis
and Strategies to Minimize Them
Pat Croskerry, MD, PhD
T
he recent article by Graber et al. 1 provides
a comprehensive overview of diagnostic errors in
medicine. There is, indeed, a long overdue and
pressing need to focus on this area. They raise
many important points, several of which deserve extra
emphasis in the light of recent developments. They also
provide an important conceptual framework within which
strategies may be developed to minimize errors in this
critical aspect of patient safety. Diagnostic errors are
associated with a proportionately higher morbidity than is
the case with other types of medical errors.
2–4
The no-fault and system-related categories of diagnostic
errors described1 certainly have the potential for reduction.
In fact, very simple changes to the system could result in
a signiﬁcant reduction in these errors. However, the
greatest challenge, as they note, is the minimization of
cognitive errors, and speciﬁcally the biases and failed
heuristics that underlie them. Historically, there has pre-
vailed an unduly negative mood toward tackling cognitive
bias and ﬁnding ways to minimize or eliminate it.
The cognitive revolution in psychology that took place
over the last 30 years gave rise to an extensive, empirical
literature on cognitive bias in decision-making, but this
advance has been ponderously slow to enter medicine.
Decision-making theorists in medicine have clung to nor-
mative, often robotic, models of clinical decision making
that have little practical application in the real world of
decision making. What is needed, instead, is a systematic
analysis of what Reason
5 has called ‘‘ﬂesh and blood’’
decision-making. This is the real decision making that
occurs at the front line, when resources are in short supply,
when time constraints apply, and when shortcuts are being
sought. When we look more closely at exactly what
ABSTRACT
In the area of patient safety, recent attention has focused
on diagnostic error. The reduction of diagnostic error is
an important goal because of its associated morbidity and
potential preventability. A critical subset of diagnostic
errors arises through cognitive errors, especially those
associated with failures in perception, failed heuristics,
and biases; collectively, these have been referred to as
cognitive dispositions to respond (CDRs). Historically,
models of decision-making have given insufﬁcient
attention to the contribution of such biases, and there
has been a prevailing pessimism against improving
cognitive performance through debiasing techniques.
Recent work has catalogued the major cognitive biases
in medicine; the author lists these and describes
a number of strategies for reducing them (‘‘cognitive
debiasing’’). Principle among them is metacognition,
a reﬂective approach to problem solving that involves
stepping back from the immediate problem to examine
and reﬂect on the thinking process. Further research
effort should be directed at a full and complete
description and analysis of CDRs in the context of
medicine and the development of techniques for
avoiding their associated adverse outcomes. Consider-
able potential exists for reducing cognitive diagnostic
errors with this approach. The author provides an
extensive list of CDRs and a list of strategies to reduce
diagnostic errors.
Acad. Med. 2003;78:775–780.
Dr. Croskerry is associate professor, Departments of Emergency Medicine
and Medical Education, Dalhousie University Faculty of Medicine, Halifax,
Nova Scotia, Canada. He is also a member of the Center for Safety in
Emergency Care, a research consortium of the University of Florida College
of Medicine, Dalhousie University Faculty of Medicine, Northwestern
University The Feinberg School of Medicine, and Brown Medical School.
Correspondence and requests for reprints should be sent to Dr. Croskerry,
Emergency Department, Dartmouth General Hospital Site, Capital District,
325 Pleasant Street, Dartmouth, Nova Scotia, Canada B2Y 4G8;
telephone: (902) 465-8491; fax: (902) 460-4148; e-mail: hxkerry@
accesscable.neti.
Two responses to this article are printed after it.
A CADEMIC M EDICINE ,V OL . 78, N O .8/A UGUST 2003 7 7 5
cognitive activity is occurring when these clinical decisions
are being made, we may be struck by how far it is removed
from what normative theory describes. Although it seems
certain we would be less likely to fail patients diagnostically
when we follow rational, normative models of decision
making, and although such models are deserving of ‘‘a
prominent place in Plato’s heaven of ideas,’’
6 they are
impractical at the sharp end of patient care. Cognitive
diagnostic failure is inevitable when exigencies of the clinical
workplace do not allow such Olympian cerebral approaches.
Medical decision makers and educators have to do three
things: (1) appreciate the full impact of diagnostic errors in
medicine and the contribution of cognitive errors in
particular; (2) refute the inevitability of cognitive diagnostic
errors; and (3) dismiss the pessimism that surrounds ap-
proaches for lessening cognitive bias.
For the ﬁrst, the specialties in which diagnostic un-
certainty is most evident and in which delayed or missed
diagnoses are most likely are internal, family, and emer-
gency medicine; this is borne out in ﬁndings from the
benchmark studies of medical error.
2–4 However, all spe-
cialties are vulnerable to this particular adverse event. The
often impalpable nature of diagnostic error perhaps reﬂects
why it does not appear in lists of serious reportable events.
7
For the second, there needs to be greater understanding of
the origins of the widespread inertia that prevails against
reducing or eliminating cognitive errors. This inertia may
exist because such errors appear to be so predictable, so
widespread among all walks of life, so ﬁrmly entrenched,
and, therefore, probably hardwired. Although the evolu-
tionary imperatives that spawned them may have served us
well in earlier times, it now seems we are left with
cognitively vestigial approaches to the complex decision
making required of us in the modern world. Although
‘‘cognitive ﬁrewalls’’ may have evolved to quarantine or
avoid cognitive errors, they are clearly imperfect
8 and will
require ontogenetic assistance (i.e., cognitive debiasing) to
avoid their consequences. Accepting this, we should say less
about biases and failed heuristics and more about cognitive
dispositions to respond (CDRs) to particular situations in
various predictable ways. Removing the stigma of bias clears
the way toward accepting the capricious nature of decision-
making, and perhaps goes some way toward exculpating
clinicians when their diagnoses fail.
An understanding of why clinicians have particular
CDRs in particular clinical situations will throw consider-
able light on cognitive diagnostic errors. The unmasking of
cognitive errors in the diagnostic process then allows for the
development of debiasing techniques. This should be the
ultimate goal, and it is not unrealistic.
Certainly, a number of clear strategies exist for reducing
the memory limitations and excessive cognitive loading
1
that can lead to diagnostic errors, but the most important
strategy may well lie in familiarizing clinicians with the
various types of CDRs that are out there, and how they
might be avoided. I made a recent extensive trawl of medical
and psychological literature, which revealed at least 30
CDRs,
9 and there are probably more (List 1). This catalogue
provides some idea of the extent of cognitive bias on
decision-making and gives us a working language to describe
it. The failures to show improvement in decision support for
clinical diagnosis that are noted by Graber et al.
1 should
come as no surprise. They are likely due to insufﬁcient
awareness of the inﬂuence of these CDRs, which is often
subtle and covert.
10 There appears to have been an historic
failure to fully appreciate, and therefore capture, where the
most signiﬁcant diagnostic failures are coming from.
Not surprisingly, all CDRs are evident in emergency
medicine, a discipline that has been described as a ‘‘natural
laboratory of error.’’
11 In this milieu, decision-making is
often naked and raw, with its ﬂaws highly visible. Nowhere
in medicine is rationality more bounded by relatively poor
access to information and with limited time to process it, all
within a milieu renowned for its error-producing con-
ditions.
12 It is where heuristics dominate, and without them
emergency departments would inexorably grind to a halt. 13
Best of all, for those who would like to study real decision
making, it is where heuristics can be seen to catastrophically
fail. Approximately half of all litigation brought against
emergency physicians arises from delayed or missed diag-
noses.
14
If we accept the pervasiveness and predictability of the
CDRs that underlie diagnostic cognitive error, then we are
obliged to search for effective debiasing techniques. Despite
the prevailing pessimism, it has been demonstrated that,
using a variety of strategies
15,16 (Table 1), CDRs can be
overcome for a number of speciﬁc biases. 16–23 It appears
that there are, indeed, cognitive pills for cognitive ills, 22
which makes intuitive sense. This is fortunate, for other-
wise, how would we learn to avoid pitfalls, develop
expertise, and acquire clinical acumen, particularly if the
predisposition for certain cognitive errors is hardwired?
However, medical educators should be aware that if the
pills are not sufﬁciently sugared, they may not be swallowed.
Yates et al.
24 have summarized some of the major
impediments that have stood in the way of developing
effective cognitive debiasing strategies, and they are not
insurmountable. The ﬁrst step is to overcome the bias
against overcoming bias. Metacognition will likely be the
mainstay of this approach. A recent cognitive debiasing
technique using cognitive forcing strategies is based on
metacognitive principles
10 and seems to be teachable to
medical undergraduates and postgraduates. 25 Essentially,
the strategy requires ﬁrst that the learner be aware of the
C OGNITIVE E RRORS IN D IAGNOSIS , CONTINUED
A CADEMIC M EDICINE ,V OL .7 8 ,N O .8/A UGUST 2003776
List 1
Cognitive Dispositions to Respond (CDRs) That May Lead to Diagnostic Error*
Aggregate bias: when physicians believe that aggregated data, such as those used to develop clinical practice guidelines, do not apply to individual
patients (especially their own), they are invoking the aggregate fallacy. The belief that their patients are atypical or somehow exceptional may lead to
errors of commission, e.g., ordering x-rays or other tests when guidelines indicate none are required.
Anchoring: the tendency to perceptually lock onto salient features in the patient’s initial presentation too early in the diagnostic process, and failing to
adjust this initial impression in the light of later information. This CDR may be severely compounded by the conﬁrmation bias.
Ascertainment bias: occurs when a physician’s thinking is shaped by prior expectation; stereotyping and gender bias are both good examples.
Availability: the disposition to judge things as being more likely, or frequently occurring, if they readily come to mind. Thus, recent experience with
a disease may inﬂate the likelihood of its being diagnosed. Conversely, if a disease has not been seen for a long time (is less available), it may be
underdiagnosed.
Base-rate neglect: the tendency to ignore the true prevalence of a disease, either inﬂating or reducing its base-rate, and distorting Bayesian reasoning.
However, in some cases, clinicians may (consciously or otherwise) deliberately inﬂate the likelihood of disease, such as in the strategy of ‘‘rule ou t
worst-case scenario’’ to avoid missing a rare but signiﬁcant diagnosis.
Commission bias: results from the obligation toward beneﬁcence, in that harm to the patient can only be prevented by active intervention. It is the
tendency toward action rather than inaction. It is more likely in over-conﬁdent physicians. Commission bias is less common than omission bias.
Conﬁrmation bias: the tendency to look for conﬁrming evidence to support a diagnosis rather than look for disconﬁrming evidence to refute it, despite
the latter often being more persuasive and deﬁnitive.
Diagnosis momentum: once diagnostic labels are attached to patients they tend to become stickier and stickier. Through intermediaries (patients,
paramedics, nurses, physicians), what might have started as a possibility gathers increasing momentum until it becomes deﬁnite, and all other
possibilities are excluded.
Feedback sanction: a form of ignorance trap and time-delay trap CDR. Making a diagnostic error may carry no immediate consequences, as considerable
time may elapse before the error is discovered, if ever, or poor system feedback processes prevent important information on decisions getting back to
the decision maker. The particular CDR that failed the patient persists because of these temporal and systemic sanctions.
Framing effect: how diagnosticians see things may be strongly inﬂuenced by the way in which the problem is framed, e.g., physicians’ perceptions of
risk to the patient may be strongly inﬂuenced by whether the outcome is expressed in terms of the possibility that the patient might die or might live.
In terms of diagnosis, physicians should be aware of how patients, nurses, and other physicians frame potential outcomes and contingencies of the
clinical problem to them.
Fundamental attribution error : the tendency to be judgmental and blame patients for their illnesses (dispositional causes) rather than examine the
circumstances (situational factors) that might have been responsible. In particular, psychiatric patients, minorities, and other marginalized g roups
tend to suffer from this CDR. Cultural differences exist in terms of the respective weights attributed to dispositional and situational causes.
Gambler’s fallacy: attributed to gamblers, this fallacy is the belief that if a coin is tossed ten times and is heads each time, the 11
th toss has a greater
chance of being tails (even though a fair coin has no memory). An example would be a physician who sees a series of patients with chest pain in clinic
or the emergency department, diagnoses all of them with an acute coronary syndrome, and assumes the sequence will not continue. Thus, the pretest
probability that a patient will have a particular diagnosis might be inﬂuenced by preceding but independent events.
Gender bias: the tendency to believe that gender is a determining factor in the probability of diagnosis of a particular disease when no such
pathophysiological basis exists. Generally, it results in an overdiagnosis of the favored gender and underdiagnosis of the neglected gender.
Hindsight bias: knowing the outcome may profoundly inﬂuence the perception of past events and prevent a realistic appraisal of what actually occurred.
In the context of diagnostic error, it may compromise learning through either an underestimation (illusion of failure) or overestimation (illusion of
control) of the decision maker’s abilities.
Multiple alternatives bias : a multiplicity of options on a differential diagnosis may lead to signiﬁcant conﬂict and uncertainty. The process may be
simpliﬁed by reverting to a smaller subset with which the physician is familiar but may result in inadequate consideration of other possibilities. On e
such strategy is the three-diagnosis differential: ‘‘It is probably A, but it might be B, or I don’t know (C).’’ Although this approach has some heuristic
value, if the disease falls in the C category and is not pursued adequately, it will minimize the chances that some serious diagnoses can be made.
Omission bias: the tendency toward inaction and rooted in the principle of nonmaleﬁcence. In hindsight, events that have occurred through the natural
progression of a disease are more acceptable than those that may be attributed directly to the action of the physician. The bias may be sustained by the
reinforcement often associated with not doing anything, but it may prove disastrous. Omission biases typically outnumber commission biases.
Order effects: information transfer is a U-function: we tend to remember the beginning part (primacy effect) or the end (recency effect). Primacy effect
may be augmented by anchoring. In transitions of care, in which information transferred from patients, nurses, or other physicians is being evaluated,
care should be taken to give due consideration to all information, regardless of the order in which it was presented.
Outcome bias: the tendency to opt for diagnostic decisions that will lead to good outcomes, rather than those associated with bad outcomes, thereby
avoiding chagrin associated with the latter. It is a form of value bias in that physicians may express a stronger likelihood in their decision-making for
what they hope will happen rather than for what they really believe might happen. This may result in serious diagnoses being minimized.
C OGNITIVE E RRORS IN D IAGNOSIS , CONTINUED
A CADEMIC M EDICINE ,V OL . 78, N O .8/A UGUST 2003 7 7 7
List 1
Continued
Overconﬁdence bias: a universal tendency to believe we know more than we do. Overconﬁdence reﬂects a tendency to act on incomplete information,
intuitions, or hunches. Too much faith is placed in opinion instead of carefully gathered evidence. The bias may be augmented by both anchoring and
availability, and catastrophic outcomes may result when there is a prevailing commission bias.
Playing the odds : (also known as frequency gambling) is the tendency in equivocal or ambiguous presentations to opt for a benign diagnosis on the
basis that it is signiﬁcantly more likely than a serious one. It may be compounded by the fact that the signs and symptoms of many common and
benign diseases are mimicked by more serious and rare ones. The strategy may be unwitting or deliberate and is diametrically opposed to the rule out
worst-case scenario strategy (see base-rate neglect ).
Posterior probability error : occurs when a physician’s estimate for the likelihood of disease is unduly inﬂuenced by what has gone on before for a
particular patient. It is the opposite of the gambler’s fallacyin that the physician is gambling on the sequence continuing, e.g., if a patient presents to
the ofﬁce ﬁve times with a headache that is correctly diagnosed as migraine on each visit, it is the tendency to diagnose migraine on the sixth visit.
Common things for most patients continue to be common, and the potential for a nonbenign headache being diagnosed is lowered through posterior
probability.
Premature closure: a powerful CDR accounting for a high proportion of missed diagnoses. It is the tendency to apply premature closure to the decision-
making process, accepting a diagnosis before it has been fully veriﬁed. The consequences of the bias are reﬂected in the maxim: ‘‘When the diagnosis is
made, the thinking stops.’’
Psych-out error : psychiatric patients appear to be particularly vulnerable to the CDRs described in this list and to other errors in their management,
some of which may exacerbate their condition. They appear especially vulnerable to fundamental attribution error . In particular, comorbid medical
conditions may be overlooked or minimized. A variant of psych-out error occurs when serious medical conditions (e.g., hypoxia, delerium, metabolic
abnormalities, CNS infections, head injury) are misdiagnosed as psychiatric conditions.
Representativeness restraint: the representativeness heuristic drives the diagnostician toward looking for prototypical manifestations of disease: ‘‘If it
looks like a duck, walks like a duck, quacks like a duck, then it is a duck.’’ Yet restraining decision-making along these pattern-recognition lines leads to
atypical variants being missed.
Search satisfying : reﬂects the universal tendency to call off a search once something is found. Comorbidities, second foreign bodies, other fractures,
and coingestants in poisoning may all be missed. Also, if the search yields nothing, diagnosticians should satisfy themselves that they have been
looking in the right place.
Sutton’s slip: takes its name from the apocryphal story of the Brooklyn bank-robber Willie Sutton who, when asked by the Judge why he robbed banks,
is alleged to have replied: ‘‘Because that’s where the money is!’’ The diagnostic strategy of going for the obvious is referred to asSutton’s law. The
slip occurs when possibilities other than the obvious are not given sufﬁcient consideration.
Sunk costs: the more clinicians invest in a particular diagnosis, the less likely they may be to release it and consider alternatives. This is an entrapment
form of CDR more associated with investment and ﬁnancial considerations. However, for the diagnostician, the investment is time and mental energy
and, for some, ego may be a precious investment. Conﬁrmation bias may be a manifestation of such an unwillingness to let go of a failing diagnosis.
Triage cueing : the triage process occurs throughout the health care system, from the self-triage of patients to the selection of a specialist by the
referring physician. In the emergency department, triage is a formal process that results in patients being sent in particular directions, which cue s
their subsequent management. Many CDRs are initiated at triage, leading to the maxim: ‘‘Geography is destiny.’’
Unpacking principle : failure to elicit all relevant information (unpacking) in establishing a differential diagnosis may result in signiﬁcant possibilities
being missed. The more speciﬁc a description of an illness that is received, the more likely the event is judged to exist. If patients are allowed to limi t
their history-giving, or physicians otherwise limit their history-taking, unspeciﬁed possibilities may be discounted.
Vertical line failure : routine, repetitive tasks often lead to thinking in silos —predictable, orthodox styles that emphasize economy, efﬁcacy, and utility.
Though often rewarded, the approach carries the inherent penalty of inﬂexibility. In contrast, lateral thinking styles create opportunities for diagnosing
the unexpected, rare, or esoteric. An effective lateral thinking strategy is simply to pose the question: ‘‘What else might this be?’’
Visceral bias : the inﬂuence of affective sources of error on decision-making has been widely underestimated. Visceral arousal leads to poor decisions.
Countertransference, both negative and positive feelings toward patients, may result in diagnoses being missed. Some attribution phenomena
(fundamental attribution error ) may have their origin in countertransference.
Yin-Yang out : when patients have been subjected to exhaustive and unavailing diagnostic investigations, they are said to have been worked up the Yin-
Yang. The Yin-Yang out is the tendency to believe that nothing further can be done to throw light on the dark place where, and if, any deﬁnitive
diagnosis resides for the patient, i.e., the physician is let out of further diagnostic effort. This may prove ultimately to be true, but to adopt the strategy
at the outset is fraught with the chance of a variety of errors.
*
The terms used to describe the various CDRs above are those by which they are commonly known in the psychology and medicine literature, as well as colloq uially. Some,
such as feedback sanction and hindsight bias, are indirect, reﬂecting more on processes that interfere with physician calibration. There is considerable overlap among CDRs,
some being known by other synonyms. These, together with further detail and citations for the original work, are described in Croskerry P. Achieving q uality in clinical
decision making: cognitive strategies and detection of bias. Acad Emerg Med. 2002;9:1184–1204. The above list was based on material in that article and in an earlier work.27
C OGNITIVE E RRORS IN D IAGNOSIS , CONTINUED
A CADEMIC M EDICINE ,V OL .7 8 ,N O .8/A UGUST 2003778
various cognitive pitfalls, and second that speciﬁc forcing
strategies be developed to counter them.
Much of clinical decision making, as Reason 5 notes, is
where ‘‘the cognitive reality departs from the formalized
ideal.’’ This cognitive reality is extremely vulnerable to
error. The problem is that cognitive error is high-hanging
fruit and difﬁcult to get at, and there will be a tendency to
pursue more readily attainable goals. There is a story about
a jogger who came across a man on his knees under
a streetlight one evening. He explained that he had
dropped his wedding ring. The jogger offered to help him
search, and he accepted. With no luck after a half hour, the
jogger asked the man if he was sure he had dropped the ring
at the place where they were searching. The man replied
that he actually dropped it several yards away in the
shadows. ‘‘Then why are we looking here?’’ asked the
jogger. ‘‘Because the light is better,’’ came the reply.
Real solutions to cognitive diagnostic errors lie in the
shadows, and they will be difﬁcult to ﬁnd. One very clear
goal in reducing diagnostic errors in medicine is to ﬁrst
describe, analyze, and research CDRs in the context of
medical decision making, and to then ﬁnd effective ways of
cognitively debiasing ourselves and those whom we teach.
Not only should we be able to reduce many cognitive
diagnostic errors, but we may also be pleasantly surprised to
ﬁnd how many can be eliminated.
The author gratefully acknowledges support through a Senior Clinical
Research Fellowship from the Faculty of Medicine, Dalhousie University,
Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada, and a grant (#P20HS11592-02) awarded by
the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality.
REFERENCES
1. Graber M, Gordon R, Franklin N. Reducing diagnostic errors in
medicine: what’s the goal? Acad Med. 2002;77:981–92.
2. Brennan TA, Leape LL, Laird NM, et al. Incidence of adverse events
and negligence in hospitalized patients: results of the Harvard Medical
Practice Study 1. N Eng J Med. 1991;324:370–6.
3. Wilson RM, Runciman WB, Gibberd RW, et al. The Quality in
Australian Health Care Study. Med J Australia 1995;163:458–71.
4. Thomas EJ, Studdert DM, Burstin HR, et al. Incidence and types of
adverse events and negligent care in Utah and Colorado. Med Care.
2000;38:261–2.
5. Reason, J. Human Error. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1990.
6. Simon HA. Alternate visions of rationality. In: Arkes HR, Hammond
KR (eds.). Judgment and Decision Making: An Interdisciplinary
Reader. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1986: 97–113.
7. Serious reportable events in patient safety: A National Quality Forum
consensus report. Washington, D.C.: National Quality Forum, 2002.
8. Cosmides L, Tooby J. Consider the source: the evolution of adaptations
for decoupling and metarepresentation. In: Sperber D (ed.). Meta-
representation. Vancouver Studies in Cognitive Science. New York:
Oxford University Press, 2001.
9. Croskerry P. Achieving quality in clinical decision making: cognitive
strategies and detection of bias. Acad Emerg Med 2002;9:1184–1204.
Table 1
Cognitive Debiasing Strategies to Reduce Diagnostic Error*
Strategy Mechanism/Action
Develop insight/
awareness
Provide detailed descriptions and thorough
characterizations of known cognitive
biases, together with multiple clinical
examples illustrating their adverse effects
on decision-making and diagnosis
formulation.
Consider
alternatives
Establish forced consideration of alternative
possibilities e.g., the generation and
working through of a differential
diagnosis. Encourage routinely asking the
question: What else might this be?
Metacognition Train for a reﬂective approach to problem
solving: stepping back from the immediate
problem to examine and reﬂect on the
thinking process.
Decrease reliance
on memory
Improve the accuracy of judgments through
cognitive aids: mnemonics, clinical
practice guidelines, algorithms, hand-held
computers.
Speciﬁc training Identify speciﬁc ﬂaws and biases in thinking
and provide directed training to overcome
them: e.g., instruction in fundamental
rules of probability, distinguishing
correlation from causation, basic Bayesian
probability theory.
Simulation Develop mental rehearsal, ‘‘cognitive
walkthrough’’ strategies for speciﬁc
clinical scenarios to allow cognitive biases
to be made and their consequences to be
observed. Construct clinical training
videos contrasting incorrect (biased)
approaches with the correct (debiased)
approach.
Cognitive forcing
strategies
Develop generic and speciﬁc strategies to
avoid predictable bias in particular clinical
situations.
Make task easier Provide more information about the speciﬁc
problem to reduce task difﬁculty and
ambiguity. Make available rapid access
to concise, clear, well-organized
information.
Minimize time
pressures
Provide adequate time for quality decision-
making.
Accountability Establish clear accountability and follow-up
for decisions made.
Feedback Provide as rapid and reliable feedback as
possible to decision makers so that errors
are immediately appreciated, understood,
and corrected, resulting in better
calibration of decision makers.
26
*Based on information from: Slovic and Fischhoff (1977),19 Fischhoff (1982),15
Arkes (1986),16 Plous (1993),23 Croskerry (2002),9 and Croskerry (2003). 10
C OGNITIVE E RRORS IN D IAGNOSIS , CONTINUED
A CADEMIC M EDICINE ,V OL . 78, N O .8/A UGUST 2003 7 7 9
10. Croskerry P. Cognitive forcing strategies in clinical decision making.
Ann Emerg Med. 2003;41:110–20.
11. Bogner, MS. (ed.). Human Error in Medicine. New Jersey: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates, 1994.
12. Croskerry P, Wears RL. Safety errors in emergency medicine. In:
Markovchick VJ and Pons PT (eds.). Emergency Medicine Secrets, 3 rd
ed. Philadelphia: Hanley and Belfus, 2002: 29–37.
13. Kovacs G, Croskerry P. Clinical decision making: an emergency
medicine perspective. Acad Emerg Med. 1999;6:947–52.
14. Data from the U.S General Accounting Ofﬁce, the Ohio Hospital
Association and the St. Paul (MN) Insurance Company, 1998 hhttp://
hookman.com/mp9807.htmi. Accessed 4/24/03.
15. Fischhoff B. Debiasing. In: Kahneman D. Slovic P. and Tversky A
(eds). Judgment under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases. New York:
Cambridge University Press, 1982: 422–44.
16. Arkes HA. Impediments to accurate clinical judgment and possible
ways to minimize their impact. In: Arkes HR, Hammond KR (eds).
Judgment and Decision Making: An Interdisciplinary Reader. New
York: Cambridge University Press, 1986: 582–92.
17. Nathanson S, Brockner J, Brenner D, et al. Toward the reduction of
entrapment. J Applied Soc Psychol. 1982;12:193–208.
18. Schwartz WB, Gorry GA, Kassirer JP, Essig A. Decision analysis and
clinical judgment. Am J Med. 1973;55:459–72.
19. Slovic P, Fischhoff B. On the psychology of experimental surprises.
J Exp Psychol Hum Percept Perform. 1977;3:544–51.
20. Edwards W, von Winterfeldt D. On cognitive illusions and their
implications. In: Arkes HR, Hammond KR (eds). Judgment and
Decision Making: An Interdisciplinary Reader. New York: Cambridge
University Press, 1986: 642–79.
21. Wolf FM, Gruppen LD, Billi JE. Use of a competing-hypothesis
heuristic to reduce pseudodiagnosticity. J Med Educ 1988;63:548–54.
22. Keren G. Cognitive aids and debiasing methods: can cognitive pills
cure cognitive ills? In: Caverni JP, Fabre JM, Gonzales M (eds).
Cognitive Biases. New York: Elsevier, 1990: 523-52.
23. Plous S. The Psychology of Judgment and Decision Making.
Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1993.
24. Yates JF, Veinott ES, Patalano AL. Hard decisions, bad decisions: on
decision quality and decision aiding. In: Schneider S, Shanteau J.
(eds.). Emerging Perspectives in Judgment and Decision Making. New
York: Cambridge University Press, 2003.
25. Croskerry P. Cognitive forcing strategies in emergency medicine.
Emerg Med J. 2002;19(suppl 1):A9.
26. Croskerry P. The feedback sanction. Acad Emerg Med. 2000;7:
1232–38.
27. Hogarth RM. Judgment and Choice: The Psychology of Decision.
Chichester, England: Wiley, 1980.
C OGNITIVE E RRORS IN D IAGNOSIS , CONTINUED
A CADEMIC M EDICINE ,V OL .7 8 ,N O .8/A UGUST 2003780